The Joe Rogan experience.
I feel like we should have a drink.
I think we would be remiss as a professionally obligate podcast to drink.
Yeah. That's nice. We're doing a podcast about drinking. Yeah,
we should have at least a small,
so the historically there's been a safety feature built into alcohol.
So for most we've been drinking. Thank you. Cheers. Cheers. Yeah,
let's try this.
Whoa. Yeah, that's nice.
Start your Monday morning or Monday as a way to start on Monday morning. Yeah.
Um, so this stuff is new.
So having alcohol that's this strong is something we've only had for a couple
hundred years. Really? So a lot of people don't realize that.
So for most of our history,
we've been drinking like two to 3% beers, uh,
grain to 3%. Yeah, that's it. Historically,
it's typically what beers came in at, um, great wines.
You can get up to like eight to 10, but there's a built-in limit to,
for natural fermentation.
So the yeast are turning sugars and alcohol, which is a poison.
So they're the Easter slowly poisoning themselves basically.
And we've bred these super Hardy yeast.
So like nowadays you can get an Australian Sohrob to like 16%
ABV. Wow. Which is historically really unprecedented,
but that's as high as you can get. Cause then the alcohol shuts down the yeast,
but a way around that is distillation. So you heat, you take that wine,
you heat it up ethanol is really volatile. So that comes off first.
And if you could figure out how to capture that vapor and turn it back into a
liquid, you've got this, you've got really concentrated alcohol.
Do they do that with wine? They do it with wine or they take,
they'll take something that's naturally for minute. So a week beer or wine.
And then they distill it.
And what do they call that when they get it on the other end, distilled liquor.
That's what liquor is. It's just a kind of liquor. So liquor, liquor,
or spirits refers to something that's been distilled. So you've,
you've basically extracted the alcohol out of the mixture and made it into a
pure form. And once you do that, you've got like 90,
you can get like some vodka,
it could be like 90 something percent ABV so that's crazy strong.
It's just really, we're not equipped to. So what you're talking about, you know,
this, it needs to be modulated.
It was always modulated historically by the fact that we were drinking beers,
that weren't very strong.
So there's going to be just volume limit to how much you can consume
is also a modulator by social stuff.
So we're drinking typically historically in a communal situation where
there's really clear ritual restrictions on drinking.
So you only drink when someone makes it toast. You're, you're modulating,
you're drinking with other people. And even, you know,
you think about just even in a pub,
you don't just drink as much as you want you order rounds, right?
And if you down your, your beer real fast,
you gotta wait until everyone else is ready or another around.
So we socially regulate our drinking and then it's been regulated by its
inherent weakness. If you want to think of it that way.
But then all of a sudden you get this kind of stuff.
You get really strong liquors and, and you can have that in your house.
That's when alcohol gets really dangerous.
And it's only been the last couple of hundred years,
distilled liquors weren't cause the,
the concept's really simple Aristotle described, um, distillation,
but technologically it's really hard to do because you gotta be able,
you have to have metallurgy.
You need to be able to heat liquids and keep them at a certain temperature that
makes, uh, they're pressurize. It's really,
it's actually kind of de prohibition. When people created stills at home,
it was like early 20th century version of meth labs. You know,
they were constantly exploding and people were like getting scalded with hot
liquid cause it's really, it's dangerous.
So it's hard to do so we only mastered it. Um,
I mean I'm telling an evolutionary story.
So my story begins 10 million years ago with primate ancestors who adapted to
alcohol. And just so 10 million years ago,
about 20,000 years ago and 13,000 years ago,
we start making alcohol seriously, not just relying on fruit,
lying around that has some alcohol in it.
And then distillation happens probably around 13 hundreds in
China and 15, 16 hundreds in Europe. So that sounds like a long time ago,
but it really evolutionarily it's yesterday. We just,
we really haven't had time culturally or genetically to adapt,
to access to this kind of alcohol.
And a long time ago when people were drinking beer and, um,
drinking wine in particular, like a lot of what they were doing.
Like if they were carrying it around with them,
they would carry beer or wine when they were going on trips,
because it didn't go bad the way water would. Right.
Um, beer and hopped beer. It goes bad pretty quickly.
It's like a couple of days, a couple of days. Yeah. Um, there's a theory that,
uh, beer might've been useful in some cultures because it pure fermenting water
purifies the water.
So you've got bad water from a pond or something like that.
And then you ferment it and make beer out of it. Yeah.
Yeah. So that's one of the stories. I mean,
the purpose of my book is to try to explain the puzzle of why we do this.
Why do we put poisons into our body? Why do we like to drink?
And it's mysterious because it's, so it's really costly. It's,
it's damaging physiologically.
It's got all these social potential social problems,
and yet we've been doing it forever.
We've been making and drinking alcohol for just about as long as we've been
doing anything in an organized fashion. In fact, we, the, it,
it's looking likely that we were doing this before agriculture and that it's
possible that the,
the desire to make beer and wine is what motivated
agriculture. So hunter gatherers,
hunter gatherers were making beer before they had agriculture
real. Yeah. And.
Uh, so they're making clay pots and yeah.
There's, um, you know, they're pounding the stuff,
they're molting it to up the sugar content. I think that's the effect of that.
And then they're fermenting it. And so we have these sites like, and,
and what's presentate Turkey,
the site called go black gay Teppei is this really cool ritual site?
It's um, these huge stone, have you seen?
Yeah, I'm super familiar with it because of Graham Hancock.
Who's been on my podcast multiple times and he's obsessed with ancient
civilizations and that is sort of the Rosetta stone of ancient civilizations
because it's, uh, at least 12,000 years old.
And the thought process was at that point in time,
no one could build the kind of structures that those people built.
So when they did it, it sort of, uh, it lent credence to his,
some of his theories that, um,
civilization has gone through multiple periods of, uh,
Ascension and then resets usually through catastrophic disasters like
asteroid impacts. So his theory, um, it, it,
it's not really just his theories,
the younger dries impact theory and the younger Dryas impact theory.
It's pointing to the end of the ice age,
which coincides with real proof of, uh,
impacts on earth in the sense of, um, they take soil samples.
And when they go down to the same, uh,
amount of time where the ice age ended,
they find this stuff called, um,
it's called nuclear glass or trite night and this stuff, it,
it, it occurs at blast sites where they test nuclear weapons,
but it also occurs at asteroid impact sites and they find it all over the place
at around 12,000,
12,000 ish years ago. And so this theory is,
um, that at the end of the ice age,
what had happened was we pass through an area in our solar system that
is rich with comments, and then we were hit and that, um,
it literally restarted civilization killed off a massive amount of people and
stopped civilizations done dead in its tracks.
And then there's a period of rebuilding.
So let's go, [inaudible].
Rebuilding. Now. They don't know. Right. It's all speculation. Cause go,
Beckley Tampa was for sure covered on purpose somewhere around
12,000 years ago,
but that doesn't indicate how long ago before then it was built. Right.
But what they do know is it was made with some pretty sophisticated methods
because a lot of the carvings were three-dimensional instead of carved into the
stone, the stone around it was carved away, right. To leave.
And there's also like animals in it that aren't even supposed to be from that
part of the world. They find that pretty fascinating. Yeah.
There's some pretty cool to it. And it's huge, you know, they've only uncovered,
I think like 10% of it so far.
Cool site. So the,
the role it plays in my story is that you they're hunter gatherers,
the people that built this.
They used to think that, but they're not necessarily sure of that.
This is the theory that guy Hancock is proposing. All right.
He believes that civilization.
They were full on agriculture and they were.
Just completely theoretical because, and very disputed. Okay.
Because you're dealing with, you know, it's like so long ago, it's hard.
Like what, what evidence is there?
And this was always the evidence against something like go Beckley Tappy.
Where's the evidence of sophisticated structures 12,000 years ago.
And then finally they found go back Taipei. So now they're like, okay,
well now we have evidence of sophisticated structures, 12,000 years ago,
which should have been built according to our timeline by hunter gatherers. But,
um, they are, they're, they're, they're resisting that.
And they're thinking this younger Dryas impact theory may indicate
that there was something that happened that, you know, if you look at Egypt,
there's clearly more than one era of, uh, building, uh, styles.
There's like an old kingdom style, a new key.
And a lot of the old stuff is like deep under the sand when they're finding it.
And it's their position that a lot of this stuff is thousands of years older
than the period.
Okay. So my,
my understanding of the site is that it was a hunter hunter gatherers.
Uh, there there's no grain storage locations. They were clearly gathering.
They were coming from all over and they were gathering at this site to build.
So they were working to, you know, rec these pillars and stuff,
and they were having blowout fees. So they have all this,
these remnants of feasting and they have these big vats that almost
certainly contained beer and possibly hallucinogen lace beer. So like.
So these hunter gatherers, they weren't growing the,
the hops or whatever they made the beer out of. They were just finding it while.
They're making it out of wild grains. But the argument, so,
so the standard story about alcohol is we invent agriculture.
Then sometime after that, we note that, you know,
someone leaves or sourdough starter out too long and it starts to turn into beer
and they're like, oh, this actually tastes all right, that's the standard story.
So we had agriculture and then we get alcohol around the 1950s
or so as an archeologist started to argue, you know,
sites like this one and other sites around the world suggest that hunter
gatherers were gathering and making alcohol before agriculture.
And so this is the beer before bread hypothesis is that's crazy.
Is that what motivated people to settle down and start focusing on making these
grains more productive was they wanted to get high,
not because they wanted to make bread and it it's, it jives.
You see the same pattern in other parts of the world. So in south America,
they make this, uh, beer like substance Chicho out of now,
they make it out of maze out of corn,
but they used to make it out of the ancient.
The wild ancestor of corn is called teosinte.
And what's interesting is Teo Sint day sucks for making grain.
Like if your goal was to make tortillas,
you wouldn't even notice this plant because the grains don't make very good
grain products to eat, but it makes great beer is really good for making Chicho.
So this plant,
if these early people were looking for something to make food with,
they would overlook this plant.
But if they were looking for something to make beer with,
they would focus on it, cultivate it, start making it produce bigger grains,
and that's how you would get corn. Okay.
It's like, what was the, did they,
do we know what the original thing that they got high with was, well,
we have like, uh, like the, the, you know, the first,
the Adam and Eve.
Yeah. I mean,
certainly we're getting a little bit drunk on just naturally fermenting fruit.
So not, you know, fruit falls on the ground.
It starts to rot what the rotting is,
is some of it's being turned into alcohol by yeast. And so clear.
It's easy to discover alcohol because it's happening naturally in our
environment all the time.
The earliest evidence of deliberately produced alcohol is from about
13,000 years ago. So a little bit before, late Taipei. Um,
and this is in, uh, modern day Israel. They have traces of,
of beer production. So people are clearly fermenting beer.
Catch new episodes of the Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify,
watch back catalog J R E videos on Spotify,
including clips easily seamlessly switch between video
and audio experience on Spotify.
You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can
download episodes to save on data costs. All for free.
Spotify is absolutely free.
You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes.
You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app.
Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience.